@c install.texi -- this file is the installation items common to
@c kpathsea-using programs.  It's included by kpathsea.texi and dvips.texi.

@item
@vindex CFLAGS
@flindex paths.make@r{, editing}
Edit the file @file{make/paths.make} if you want to make changes to the
installation directories or paths that will have effect across different
runs of @code{configure}.  Alternatively, override the Make variables on
the command line when you run Make.

@cindex installation directories, changing
Exception: to reliably change the top-level @samp{prefix}, you must give
@samp{configure} the option @samp{-prefix=@var{prefix}}, instead of
changing the value in @file{paths.make}.

@item
@cindex paths, changing default
Edit @file{kpathsea/texmf.cnf.in} to change the local paths to match your
local setup.  @xref{Default paths, , , kpathsea, Kpathsea}, for more
details on changing the paths. A copy is in @file{kpathsea/INSTALL}.
See @file{kpathsea/HIER} for an explanation of the default setup.

If the paths do not match where the files actually are, the programs
will probably start up Very, Very, Slowly, and/or not be able to find
the fonts or other input files.

@item
@flindex configure@r{, running}
@flindex CONFIG
@flindex kpathsea/CONFIG
@flindex c-auto.h.in
@flindex Makefile.in
@findex ac_include
@cindex @@@var{var}@@ substitutions
@cindex system dependencies
@code{sh configure} (in the top-level directory).  This makes
system-dependent @samp{#define's} in @file{*/c-auto.h} (from the
corresponding @file{c-auto.h.in}) and creates a @file{Makefile} (from
the corresponding @file{Makefile.in}, by doing @samp{@@@var{var}@@} and
@samp{ac_include} substitutions).

Perhaps the most common desire is to compile with optimization instead
of or as well as debugging.  You can change the options passed to the
compiler by changing @samp{CFLAGS}, either for @code{configure} or
@code{make}.  For example:

@example
prompt$ env CFLAGS="-g -O" configure
prompt$ make
@exdent @r{or}
prompt$ configure
prompt$ make CFLAGS="-g -O"
@end example

@noindent @xref{Invoking configure, , Running @code{configure} scripts,
autoconf, Autoconf}, for detailed @code{configure} options.  (A copy is
in @file{kpathsea/CONFIGURE}.)

@item
@code{make} (still in the top-level directory). Barring configuration
and compiler bugs, this will compile all the programs.  @xref{Common
problems, , Common problems, kpathsea, Kpathsea}, for system-dependent
problems (this section is also in @file{kpathsea/INSTALL}).

This also creates the @file{texmf.cnf} and @file{paths.h} files that
define the default search paths.
